                                                              www.parallaxsemiconductor.com
                                                              sa le s@ pa ra lla xsemicondu ctor.c om
                                                              sup port@p arallaxsemiconduc tor.c om
                                                              ph on e: 916 ‐632 ‐46 64 • f a x:9 1 6‐62 4‐ 8003



Propeller Manual v1.1 Supplement & Errata
This document tracks the technical content changes between Propeller Manual v1.1 and
Propeller Manual v1.2. Note that the pagination did not change with this revision, so page
numbers below refer to both versions. Additions/changes are shown in blue.

In addition, all significant changes noted here have been marked with comments on the web
PDF of the Propeller Manual Version 1.2.


Page 16: Table 1-2: Specifications
                               Main RAM: Long (32-bit), Word (16-bit), or Byte (8-bit) addressable
RAM/ROM Organization
                               Cog RAM: Long (32-bit) addressable only



Page 23: First paragraph, last two sentences now read:
            The Cog RAM holds a copy of the Spin Interpreter when executing Spin
            code, or is used for executable code, data, and variables when executing
            Propeller Assembly code. The last 16 locations serve as interfaces to the
            System Counter, I/O pins, and local cog peripherals.


Page 23: Table 1-3 Cog RAM Special Purpose Registers
$1F4         OUTA      Read/Write        Output States for P31–P0, p. Error! Bookmark not
                                         defined Error! Bookmark not defined


Page 24: First paragraph under Hub, last two sentences:
            Hub instructions, the Propeller Assembly instructions that access mutually
            exclusive resources, require 8 cycles to execute but they first need to be
            synchronized to the start of the hub access window. It takes up to 15 cycles
            (16 minus 1, if we just missed it) to synchronize to the hub access window
            plus 8 cycles to execute the hub instruction, so hub instructions take from 8 to
            23 cycles to complete.


Page 24: New second paragraph inserted under Hub:
            Propeller Assembly hub instructions include CLKSET, p.Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; COGID, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; COGINIT, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; COGSTOP, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; HUBOP, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined. LOCKCLR, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; LOCKNEW, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; LOCKRET, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; LOCKSET, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; RDBYTE, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; RDLONG, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; RDWORD, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; WRBYTE, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined. WRLONG, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; and WRWORD, p. Error! Bookmark
            not defined..

Propeller Manual Supplement & Errata for Version 1.1                                                      1 of 7
Parallax Semiconductor




Page 24: Last paragraph under Hub, last sentence:
            The hub instruction executes immediately (8 cycles) leaving an additional 8
            cycles for other instructions before the next hub access window arrives.


Page 25: Replaced Figure 1-3: Cog-Hub Interaction – Best Case Scenario and Figure 1-4:
Cog-Hub Interaction – Worst Case Scenario




        Figure 0-1: Cog-Hub Interaction – Best Case Scenario




        Figure 0-2: Cog-Hub Interaction – Worst Case Scenario


Page 25: First paragraph, second and third sentences:
            The cog waits until the next hub access window (15 cycles later) then the hub
            instruction executes (8 cycles) for a total of 23 cycles for that hub instruction.
            Again, there are 8 additional cycles after the hub instruction for other
            instructions to execute before the next hub access window arrives.


Page 30: Second paragraph under Locks now reads:
            The lock bits exist inside the Hub (outside of Main RAM and Cog RAM)
            but are globally accessible by every cog through the hub instructions:
            LOCKNEW, LOCKRET, LOCKSET, and LOCKCLR. These special instructions provide an
            effective control mechanism because only one cog at a time can execute
            them and the LOCKSET and LOCKCLR instructions each perform a read and
            write as one atomic operation. The LOCKNEW and LOCKRET instructions
            provide a centralized way for cogs to check out a lock for a new purpose,
            or return a lock that is no longer in use. See Error! Reference source not
            found., Error! Bookmark not defined.; Error! Reference source not found.,
            Error! Bookmark not defined.; Error! Reference source not found., Error!


Propeller Manual Supplement & Errata for Version 1.1                                             2 of 7
Parallax Semiconductor


            Bookmark not defined.; and Error! Reference source not found., Error!
            Bookmark not defined. for more information.


Pages 43, 144, 158-159, 249, 326:
The “~>” operator is now referred to as “Bitwise Shift arithmetic right.”


Page 68, Table 2 3: Clock Mode Setting Constants
XTAL3           500 Ω       16 pF     External high-speed crystal (20 MHz to 60 MHz)



Page 73: Using CNT Section
Moved second paragraph in the Using CNT section; it now appears as the second paragraph
following the first code example.


Page 76: COGINIT syntax definition for COGID now reads:
                 CogID is the ID (0 – 7) of the cog to start, or restart. A CogID value of 8 – 15
                  results in the next available cog being started, if possible; like a COGNEW
                  command.


Page 78: COGNEW Explanation, first paragraph divided into two paragraphs with new
material:
            COGNEW starts a new cog and runs either a Spin method or a Propeller Assembly
            routine within it. For Spin methods, the new cog’s RAM is loaded with the Spin
            Interpreter from the Main ROM, which then fetches and executes the Spin code
            tokens from the application image in Main RAM. For Propeller Assembly, the
            targeted assembly code itself is loaded from the application image in Main RAM
            into the cog's RAM for execution.
            If the launch is successful...


Page 85: First paragraph, second sentence:
            CON must start in column 1 (the leftmost column) of the line it is on and we
            recommend the lines following be indented by at least two spaces for
            readability.


Page 103: New heading and paragraphs added to DAT section:
            Variables in Propeller Assembly
            The assembly example above includes two symbols used as variables, Delay and
            Time. Since these are defined as reserved memory (see RES directive, page Error!
            Bookmark not defined.) they are not initialized; upon launch of the assembly
            code, they will contain whatever value happened to be in the register they


Propeller Manual Supplement & Errata for Version 1.1                                                 3 of 7
Parallax Semiconductor


            occupy in Cog RAM. Assembly variables are defined this way when it is the
            intention of the code to initialize them during run time.
            To create a compile-time, initialized assembly variable instead, use the DAT
            block's LONG data declaration (page Error! Bookmark not defined.). It can be used
            in place of RES, and upon launch of the assembly code, will load the value
            following it into the register that the variable occupies in Cog RAM.
            If using a mix of LONG-based and RES-based symbols, make sure to define all RES-
            based symbols last. See Error! Reference source not found. on page Error!
            Bookmark not defined., for more information.



Page 128: LONG Explanation, numbered list:
            2) declare and initialize long-aligned, and/or long-sized, data in a DAT block, or


Page 129: First sentence under Long Data Declaration (Syntax 2)
            In DAT blocks, syntax 2 of LONG is used to declare and initialize long-aligned,
            and/or long-sized data that is compiled as constant values in main memory.


Page 131, starting under first code example, until next header:
            The next line, long[@MyList][0] := Temp + $01234567, writes a long-sized value to
            main memory. It sets the value at main memory address $20 to $012400B7. The
            address $20 was calculated from the address of the symbol MyList ($20) plus long
            offset 0 (0 bytes).
            long[@MyList][0]  long[$20][0]  long[$20 + (0*4)] 
            long[$20]

            The value $012400B7 was derived from the current value of Temp plus $01234567;
            $BB50 + $01234567 equals $012400B7.



Page 141: Second paragraph under Explanation, second sentence.
            OBJ must start in column 1 (the leftmost column) of the line it is on and we
            recommend the lines following be indented by at least two spaces for
            readability.


Page 148: Second example code block, last line:
               WakeUp          = Reset | Initialize




Propeller Manual Supplement & Errata for Version 1.1                                             4 of 7
Parallax Semiconductor


Page 181: PRI syntax element explanations
                SourceCodeStatements is one or more lines of executable source code that perform
                 the function of the method; usually indented by at least two spaces for
                 readability.


Page 182: PUB syntax element explanations
                LocalVar is a name for a local variable (optional). LocalVar must not have the
                 same symbol name as any VAR or CON symbol, but other methods may also
                 use the same symbol name.
                SourceCodeStatements is one or more lines of executable source code that perform
                 the function of the method; usually indented by at least two spaces for
                 readability.


Page 183: Last paragraph in Public Method Declaration section
            All executable statements that belong to a PUB method appear underneath its
            declaration. By convention these lines are indenteded by two spaces for
            readability, but this is not required for functionality. (However, indention is
            critical for certain command blocks, such as REPEAT and IF.)



Page 188: REPEAT syntax element explanation
                Statement(s) is an optional block of one or more lines of code to execute
                 repeatedly. Omitting Statement(s) is rare, but may be useful in syntax 3 and 4 if
                 Condition(s) achieves the needed effects. Indention is required for all
                 statements in the block.


Page 210: VAR syntax element explanation
                Symbol is the desired name for the variable, and must be unique to the object.


Page 210: Second paragraph added to Explanation section
            In Spin, all variables defined in VAR blocks are initialized to zero. Though
            it is rarely implemented, it is possible to force these variables to initialize
            to a non-zero value upon the next boot up by including code that updates
            the application's global variable area in the external EEPROM.


Page 210: Last sentence in first paragraph under Variable Declarations (Syntax 1)
            VAR must start in column 1 (the leftmost column) of the line it is on and the
            lines following it are usually indented by at least two spaces for readability.




Propeller Manual Supplement & Errata for Version 1.1                                                 5 of 7
Parallax Semiconductor


Page 218: First line of code in CON block example:
               _clkmode = xtal1                        'Set for slow crystal


Page 252, Opcode Table
Opcode Table “Clocks” column; value range is 8..23

Pages 254-255: Propeller Assembly Instruction Master Table
In “Clocks” column, the value range is 8..23 for the following rows: CLKSET, COGID,
COGINIT, COGSTOP, HUBOP, LOCKCLR, LOCKNEW, LOCKRET, LOCKSET, RDBYTE, RDLONG, RDWORD, WRBYTE,
WRLONG, WRWORD.


Page 255, Propeller Assembly Instruction Master Table
WAITCNT, WAITPEQ, WAITPNE rows “Clocks” column value is 6+.


Page 255, Propeller Assembly Instruction Master Table
                                               5
WAITVID row “Clocks” column value is 4+ .


Page 256: Note 1, sentences one through five:
            Hub instructions require 8 to 23 clock cycles to execute depending on the
            relation between the cog’s hub access window and the instruction’s moment
            of execution. The Hub provides a hub access window to each cog every 16
            clocks. Because each cog runs independently of the Hub, it must sync to the
            Hub when executing a hub instruction. The first hub instruction in a sequence
            will take from 0 to 15 clocks to sync up to the hub access window, and 8
            clocks afterwards to execute; thus the 8 to 23 (15 + 8) clock cycles to execute.
            After the first hub instruction, there will be 8 (16 – 8) free clocks before a
            subsequent hub access window arrives for that cog; enough time to execute
            two 4-clock instructions without missing the next hub access window.


Page 256: Note 1, new sentence at the end.
            Propeller Assembly hub instructions include CLKSET, p.Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; COGID, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; COGINIT, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; COGSTOP, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; HUBOP, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined. LOCKCLR, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; LOCKNEW, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; LOCKRET, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; LOCKSET, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; RDBYTE, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; RDLONG, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; RDWORD, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; WRBYTE, p. Error! Bookmark not
            defined.; WRLONG, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; and WRWORD, p. Error! Bookmark
            not defined..




Propeller Manual Supplement & Errata for Version 1.1                                              6 of 7
Parallax Semiconductor


Page 256: added Note 5
            Note 5:     WAITVID consumes 4 clocks itself; however, complete data handoff
            requires 7 clocks (6 at some frequencies) between frames. The combination of
            CTRA PLL frequency and VSCL FrameClocks must provide an effective 7 (or
            6) system clocks.



Multiple pages: for the Propeller Assembly Hub instructions
The Opcode Table “Clocks” column value is 8..23. Also, an Explanation paragraph will read:

             “(Instruction) is a hub instruction. Hub instructions require 8 to 23 clock cycles to
            execute...”

Propeller Assembly hub instructions include CLKSET, p.Error! Bookmark not
defined.; COGID, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; COGINIT, p. Error! Bookmark
not defined.; COGSTOP, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.;        HUBOP, p. Error!
Bookmark not defined. LOCKCLR, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; LOCKNEW, p.
Error! Bookmark not defined.; LOCKRET, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.;
LOCKSET, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; RDBYTE, p. Error! Bookmark not
defined.; RDLONG, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; RDWORD, p. Error! Bookmark
not defined.;     WRBYTE, p. Error! Bookmark not defined.; WRLONG, p. Error!
Bookmark not defined.; and WRWORD, p. Error! Bookmark not defined..



Page 268: Second paragraph under Explanation, first sentence.
            Propeller Assembly does not use a call stack, so the return address must be
            stored in a different manner.


Page 300: Second paragraph under Explanation.
            Propeller Assembly does not use a call stack, so the return address of a call-
            type operation must be stored in a different manner.


Multiple Pages:
WAITCNT, WAITPEQ, WAITPNE Opcode Table, “Clocks” column value is 6+.


Page 371: WAITVID row “Clocks” column value is 4+1. Footnote added to table:
            WAITVID consumes 4 clocks itself; however, complete data handoff requires
            7 clocks (6 at some frequencies) between frames. The combination of
            CTRA PLL frequency and VSCL FrameClocks must provide an effective 7
            (or 6) system clocks.




Propeller Manual Supplement & Errata for Version 1.1                                            7 of 7
Parallax Semiconductor


Page 379: Reserved Word List Table
Added a # symbol to ENC, indicating it is reserved for future use.


Page 380, second paragraph below first code listing, third sentence:
               To remedy this, there is a special CMPSUB D, S instruction




Parallax Inc., dba Parallax Semiconductor, makes no warranty, representation or guarantee regarding the suitability of its products
for any particular purpose, nor does Parallax Inc., dba Parallax Semiconductor, assume any liability arising out of the application or
use of any product, and specifically disclaims any and all liability, including without limitation consequential or incidental damages
even if Parallax Inc., dba Parallax Semiconductor, has been advised of the possibility of such damages. Reproduction of this
document in whole or in part is prohibited without the prior written consent of Parallax Inc., dba Parallax Semiconductor.

Copyright © 2011 Parallax Inc. dba Parallax Semiconductor. All rights are reserved.
Propeller and Parallax Semiconductor are trademarks of Parallax Inc. All other trademarks herein are the property of their respective
owners.




Propeller Manual Supplement & Errata for Version 1.1                                                                           8 of 7
